+++
title = "Home"
sort_by = "weight"
weight = 0
+++

# Tromptown Historical Society

{{ figure(
    src = "../unprocessed/admiral_de_ruyter.jpg",
    alt = "Michiel de Ruyter",
    caption = "Admiral Michiel de Ruyter, namesake of the town",
    width = 250,
    float = "right"
) }}

The Tromptown Historical Society was founded in 1975 and chartered by the State
Education Department in 1978. The group's focus has been collecting and
preserving historical materials of DeRuyter and surrounding areas. These are
housed in our museum at 712 Utica Street. We offer a number of programs,
including assisting with genealogy searches and historical reports. We
participate in the Firemen's Field Days.

{{ figure(
    src = "../unprocessed/building.jpg",
    alt = "exterior of the DeRuyter Museum",
    caption = "Exterior of the DeRuyter Museum",
    width = 250,
    float = "left"
) }}

The Society is actively seeking new members and we always need additional
donations. Membership and donations are vital to the existence of our
organization. We need members to become involved with our existing projects and
welcome new ideas and suggestions for new programs.

The building housing our museum has quite a history of its own. In the early
days it was used as an office for the Sutton Tannery business. In 1864 the
building was remodeled for John Rider for use as a bank. In 1870 it became the
E.B. Parsons Bank; in 1888 it became H.P Mitchell Insurance; in 1889 is was the
Post Office; in 1899 it became the DeRuyter Banking Company. An addition was put
on the north side of the building in 1913 and in 1918 the name changed to
DeRuyter State Bank. A fire-proof vault and safety deposit boxes were added
in 1954. In 1959 the DeRuyter State Bank merged with First Trust & Deposit
Company and remained as First Trust for 20 years when First Trust became Key
Bank. Key Bank moved to its current location at the corner of Utica Street and
Mill Street in 1986 and in 1987 it was purchased by the Tromptown Historical
Society.

## Museum Hours

We are open from 2 to 4 PM on the second and fourth Saturdays of each month,
April to October, or by appointment.
