+++
title = "History of DeRuyter"
weight = 2
+++

# History of DeRuyter

The following section originates from _Our County and Its People_, as written by
John Smith in 1899. Some edits have been made, primarily to remove references to
other chapters and lengthy listings. The book may be downloaded in its entirety
without restrictions for free at
[the Internet Archive](https://archive.org/details/cu31924028831960/mode/2up).

---

This is one of the five towns that were formed previous to the erection of the
county and was set off from Cazenovia March 15, 1798; it then contained the
territory of the present day towns of German, Lincklaen, Otselic and Pitcher, in
Chenango county, and Georgetown in Madison county. The town received its name in
honor of Admiral De Ruyter, of the Dutch navy. It is the southwest corner town
in the county. It presents a hilly surface which is broken by the valley of the
Tioughnioga River, which with numerous small tributaries, drains and waters the
town. The soil is of general good quality, sandy and gravelly loam on the hills
and rich alluvium in the valleys. The village of the same name as the town is
situated in the southwestern part of the town; it was incorporated in 1833.
There are only two post-offices in the town — De Ruyter and Sheds (Shed's
Corners.) The population of the town as shown by the census taken at various
dates from 1835 was as follows:

| 1835  | 1840  | 1845  | 1850  | 1855  | 1860  | 1865  | 1870  | 1875  | 1880  | 1890  | 1892  |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 1,562 | 1,799 | 1,829 | 1,931 | 1,921 | 1,817 | 1,820 | 2,009 | 1,609 | 1,584 | 1,500 | 1,480 |

The principal occupation of the farmers of the town is dairying to which general
farming has largely given place in recent years. Some twenty-five years ago,
when the manufacture of cheese in factories was a prominent industry, five
factories were established in the town; but there are only three now in
operation — one a mile and a half north of the village, one four miles north of
the village and one at Shed's Corners. Large quantities of excellent butter are
made by individual farmers throughout the town. The raising of potatoes for
market has taken on considerable importance within quite recent years and at
fair prices are a profitable crop. The numerous saw mills of early times are
nearly all idle. Considerable hardwood lumber is still cut, most of which goes
to the Bryant Furniture Company, which operates a steam saw mill in the village
and has a large factory in Truxton.

The destruction of the records of this town renders it impossible to give the
date and proceedings of the early town meetings, and doubtless deprives us of
much important and interesting material. The town constitutes a part of the
second school commissioner's district of the county and is divided into ten
school districts with a school house in each, in which are employed fifteen
teachers in 1897, to teach a total of 340 children. The present value of school
buildings and sites is nearly $10,000. An excellent high school is conducted in
the village of De Ruyter, which is the direct successor of the old De Ruyter
Institute, founded in 1836 by the Seventh-Day Baptists. It became a Union free
school in 1874, and the name, De Ruyter Union School and Academy, was adopted
in 1877. The present faculty includes Irving Smith Sears, principal; Jannie Van
Demark Sheely, preceptress, and four assistants. The attendance at the present
time is about 270.

As at present bounded the town lies wholly within the Gore. Settlement began in
1793 by Elijah and Elias Benjamin and Eli Colegrove. Both the Benjamin brothers
had families, members of which and their descendants have been prominent in the
community. Joseph Messenger, Samuel Thompson, and William and Thompson Burdick
became settlers in 1795, and Daniel Page, Gideon Foster and Eleazer Gage a
little later. In 1800, or within a year or two thereafter, Matthew Wells,
Jonathan Shed, Darius Benjamin, Samuel Bowen, LEvi Wood, Sylvester Crumb and
probably a few others located in different parts of the town. Among other
settlers previous to or about the time of the formation of the county in 1806
were Joseph Rich, Jonathan Bentley, Benjamin Merchant, Job Webb, Benjamin
Stratton, Abram Sutton, John Shepard, James Hunt, Nathaniel Wright, John Pierce,
Reuben Burnard, John Gifford, Ephraim Arnold, Beman Hoag, David Wood, John
Hewitt, Joseph, Thomas and Benjamin Mitchell, Dr. Ephraim Otis, Stephen
Bogardus, Benjamin Wybert, Enos and Amos Peasley, Elijah Cornell, Joseph and
Benjamin Tripp, and Joseph Underwood. Many in this list were Quakers, who
established a Meeting about 1806, and have always been numerous and influential
in the community. These and the settlers who came in later soon cleared parts of
their farms, built saw mills and grist mills, opened roads, established the
schools and churches and gradually surrounded themselves with the comforts and
advantages of the older settled localities further east.

De Ruyter Village. — This village is pleasantly situated on the Tioughnioga on
the western border of the town and is a station on the Lehigh Valley railroad.
The early gathering at this point was due mainly to the building of a saw mill
immediately after the arrival of the first settlers; this was soon followed by a
grist mill, and in 1800 Samuel Bowen opened the first store. Two or three other
merchants began trading before the erection of the county in 1806. The
post-office was established in 1810. Ephraim Arnold established an early
tannery, and Daniel Page built the first public house in the corporation as
early as the beginning of the century. The Cazenovia Coal and Lumber Companies
carries on business here. John Rice Rider established a banking business in
1864, and in 1870, E. B. Parsons and E. B. Crandall opened the E. B. Parsons &
Co.'s bank, with $15,000 capital, This institution subsequently failed. In 1889,
the De Ruyter Banking Company was organized by B. S. Bryant, president; M. E.
Teller, vice-president; F. S. Mitchell, treasurer and cashier. The capital is
$10,000.

The village fire department had its inception in 1833, when the first engine was
purchased, and measures adopted for building an engine house and town hall; the
latter was erected in 1839 and was sold in 1855 and a new one built. The
department now consists of a hose company and engine company of seventy men. A
system of water works was established in 1897, which supplies the public with
pure spring water and gives a pressure in pipes of 134 pounds to the square
inch; twenty eight hydrants have been set in the village, thus rendering the
fire engines subsequently useless.

Physicians practicing in the village are Drs. Silas Clarke, Edwin M. Coon, James
E. McClellan, C. P. Monro, and J. H. Shaffer, the latter a dentist. De Ruyter
has had two or three lawyers of more than ordinary ability and repute. The
present attorneys are Wallace E. Burdick, J. H. Poole and H. D. Messenger.

De Ruyter has had several newspapers which are now extinct. The first was the De
Ruyter Weekly News, started in 1862 by J. E. N. Backus; it lived about two
years. The De Ruyter New Era was founded by John R. Beden in 1870. The De Ruyter
American was established in December, 1896, by N. E. Bugbee and was discontinued
in November, 1897. The De Ruyter Gleaner was established September 18, 1878, by
W. W. Ames; it absorbed the New Era in 1889 and is still continued as a healthy,
ably conducted journal.

The Taber House, built in 1849, is now conducted by John Coye; the Central Hotel
was changed in name to the Park Hotel and much improved and is now conducted by
W. W. Owens. The De Ruyter Hotel was built for a dwelling by M. R. Merchant; it
passed to Isaac Samson, who sold it to M. W. Baldwin; he changed it to a hotel
in 1893.

There are four churches in the village — Congregational, organized in 1897 and
built an edifice in the same year; Baptist, organized in 1798; Seventh-Day
Baptist, formed within a short time after settlement began; Methodist, organized
before 1817.

De Ruyter village was incorporated April 15, 1833; reincorporated December 7,
1847, and again February 18, 1878, under the law of April 20, 1870.

Shed's Corners. — This is a mere hamlet in the northeast part of the town on the
Tioughnioga, which took its name from Jonathan Shed, the pioneer of that
locality. The post-office, which has been in existence there many years, was
changed in name recently by the Department, to Sheds. There was formerly a
Universalist church which has become extent; a Methodist church has been in
existence many years. A hotel was kept by Allen Randall, which was burned and
not rebuilt. One of the cheese factories and milk stations of the town is in
operation here, and one store.
